WASHINGTON — The Senate failed Tuesday to overcome a procedural obstacle to a bill that would have banned abortions after 20 weeks, legislation that has already been approved by the House.

The measure fell six votes short of the 60 needed to advance. It was among several votes that have happened or are expected in Congress as lawmakers await an address Thursday from Pope Francis and as Democrats and Republicans wrangle over the role of abortion in fiscal politics.

Some conservative Republicans are threatening to refuse to vote for a short-term spending bill if it provides federal funding for Planned Parenthood, after a series of undercover videos surfaced this summer claiming that affiliates of the group illegally profit from selling tissue from aborted fetuses to researchers. Planned Parenthood has denied the accusation.

The current spending laws expire on Oct. 1. Without a short-term measure, the government will shut down for the second time in three years. The Senate and the House are expected to vote on measures to defund Planned Parenthood as early as this week, bills that would probably not pass the Senate and would be vetoed by President Obama.

Speaking on the Senate floor, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, said “Scientific advances like the sonogram are helping pull back the curtain on the mystery of life.” He said: “We in this chamber are never going to agree completely on the abortion question. But we should at least be able to agree that if an unborn child has reached the point where he or she can feel pain, that child’s life deserves protection.”

Many states have passed 20-week limit and other measures to chip away at abortion rights, and developments in neonatal medicine have further complicated the debate. The issue has again become a flash point in Congress. “There was a time when this issue came before us frequently,” said Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois.

The bill before the Senate would have made it criminal to provide an abortion for a woman who is over 20 weeks pregnant, without exceptions for women whose life is endangered by the pregnancy. That lost it the support of lawmakers like Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who might have otherwise voted for the bill.
